.TH FILTERM 1 "30 Jul 1998" "Konwert" "Linux User's Manual"
.SH NAME
filterm \- filter terminal input and/or output
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B filterm
.I INPUT OUTPUT
.RI [ COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Execute the specified
.I COMMAND
(default is the shell), filtering terminal input and/or output.
.PP
It can help e.g. when our terminal is unable to display non-ASCII
characters or to enter them from the keyboard. It also makes writing
various terminal filters easier.
.PP
.I INPUT
and
.I OUTPUT
are names of konwert's filters \- they are passed as the first argument
to the
.BR konwert (1)
program.
.B filterm \-
.I OUTPUT
filters only output, and
.B filterm
.I INPUT
.B \-
only input.
.PP
The command 
.B -
executes the shell as a login shell.
.PP
It differs from
.B konwert
.I INPUT
.B |
.I COMMAND
.B |
.B konwert
.I OUTPUT
in that the command is executed on a pseudo-terminal, so full-screen
programs work correctly.
.PP
The filters have to output the characters as soon as they receive all
necessary input, without buffering.
.BR trs (1)
scripts are OK, but
.BR sed (1)
or
.BR awk (1)
or
.BR tr (1)
scripts are not. In C you may use
.BR read() ,
.BR getchar() ,
.BR fread() ,
and
.BR write() ,
but
.B putchar()
and
.B fwrite()
only together with
.BR fflush(stdout) .
In C++:
.BR cin.get() ,
.BR cout.put() ,
and
.BR "cout <<" .
In perl:
.BR sysread ,
.BR getc ,
.BR read ,
and
.BR syswrite ,
but
.B print
only with
.BR "$| = 1" .
.PP
The input filter will have set the environment variable
.BR FILTERM=in ,
and the output one \-
.BR FILTERM=out .
This way some filters can slightly alter their behaviour when working
for filterm.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP 10
.B \-\-help
display help and exit
.TP
.B \-\-version
output version information and exit
.SH FILTERS FOR FILTERM
See
.BR konwert (1).
Additionally the following konwert's filters are designed only for
filterm:
.TP
\fBtyldy\fP (input)
Polish
.I ~a~c~e~l~n~o~s~x~z
.TP
\fBlewyap\fP (input)
Polish
.I `a`c`e`l`n`o`s`x`z
.TP
\fBboldpl\fP (output)
ASCII with Polish letters shown as bold.
.TP
\fBpinectrlchars\fP (output)
Replaces the characters
.I 128..159
shown by the Pine (or another program) as
.I ^À..^ß
back to the real
.IR 128..159 .
.TP
\fB512bold\fP (output)
Changes the mapping of colors in 512-character mode, which restricts the
number of colors to eight. The palette is dynamically changed to contain
the eight most recently used colors. When more colors are used at once,
some of them display incorrectly.
.TP
\fB512bold1\fP (output)
Changes the mapping of colors in 512-character mode. Instead of ignoring
the intensity, the following colors are available: black, red, green,
white, blue, light magenta, light cyan, light gray; others are
substituted with approximations. This gives better effect, allowing to
show the intensity, with the side-effect of belying the hue of some
colors.
.TP
\fBkbdmacros\fP (input)
Keyboard macros. A sequence of keys can be recorded with
.B Esc Ctrl-A
.I SEQUENCE
.B Esc Ctrl-E
.I SHORTCUT
\- after which, if you press the
.IR SHORTCUT ,
the
.I SEQUENCE
will be generated instead. Later such assignment can be deleted with
.B Esc Ctrl-A Esc Ctrl-E
.I SHORTCUT
.B Esc
.BR Ctrl-E .
Instead of
.B Esc Ctrl-
you often may press
.BR Ctrl-Alt- .
The defined shortcuts, together with the above redefinable key
combinations used to define them, are stored in the
.I ~/.kbdmacros
file. Note: when you redefine a sequence, all its prefixes will not be
passed through immediately, but wait until it can be unambiguously told
which sequence was actually input. This includes escape sequences
representing some extended keys.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR konwert (1)
.SH BUGS
512bold filter is not perfect. Some escape sequences may be emulated
incorrectly. Additionally, colors changed in multiple steps or not used
unnecessarily allocate some of the eight colors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
filterm filters terminal input and/or output. It forms part of the
konwert package.
.PP
Copyright (c) 1998 Marcin 'Qrczak' Kowalczyk
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.SH AUTHOR
.ft CW
.nf
 __("<   Marcin Kowalczyk * qrczak@knm.org.pl http://qrczak.home.ml.org/
 \\__/       GCS/M d- s+:-- a21 C+++>+++$ UL++>++++$ P+++ L++>++++$ E->++
  ^^                W++ N+++ o? K? w(---) O? M- V? PS-- PE++ Y? PGP->+ t
QRCZAK                  5? X- R tv-- b+>++ DI D- G+ e>++++ h! r--%>++ y-
.fi
.ft R
