.TH KONWERT 1 "30 Jul 1998" "Konwert" "Linux User's Manual"
.SH NAME
konwert \- interface for various character encoding conversions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B konwert
.I FILTER
.RI [ FILE ].\|.\|.\|
.RB [ \-o
.I DEST
|
.BR \-O ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Konwert allows filtering multiple files through multiple filters.
It filters the specified
.IR FILE s,
or stdin if none are given.
.PP
Simple
.I FILTER
is the name of an executable file from the directory
.I ~/.konwert/filters
or the system-wide one, normally
.IR /usr/share/konwert/filters .
Such program itself filters stdin to stdout.
.PP
The filtering rule can be more complex:
.PP
.B konwert
.IB FILTER1 + FILTER2
means
.B konwert
.I FILTER1
|
.B konwert
.IR FILTER2 .
.PP
.B konwert
.IB FORMAT1 \- FORMAT2\fR,
unless such filter exists, tries to find a common
.IR FORMAT3 ,
such that both filters
.IB FORMAT1 \- FORMAT3
and
.IB FORMAT3 \- FORMAT1
do exist.
.PP
.B konwert
.IB FILTER / ARG /\fR.\|.\|.\|
passes arguments to the filter. Arguments can also be specified here:
.IB FORMAT1 / ARGS \- FORMAT2\fR.
The meaning of arguments depends on the particular filter.
.PP
.B konwert
.BI '( "COMMAND ARGS\fR.\|.\|.\|" )'
executes this arbitrary shell command. This is useful with
.B \-o
or
.B \-O
options. The command cannot contain the string
.BR )+ ,
which will terminate this filter's specification.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP 10
\fB\-o\fP \fIDEST\fP
output goes to this file/directory instead of stdout
.TP
.B \-O
every input file is replaced with its translation
.TP
.B \-\-help
display help and exit
.TP
.B \-\-version
output version information and exit
.PP
Redirecting output to one of the source files with either
.B \-o
or
.B >
instead of
.B \-O
will corrupt it! Option
.B \-O
creates a temporary file in
.I /tmp
and later copies it back onto the source.
.SH CHARACTER ENCODING CONVERSIONS
You can convert text between any two charsets, for example
.B konwert
.BR cp437\-iso2 .
.PP
Characters unavailable in the target charset will be substituted with
approximations with available ones. The approximations need not be
single characters.
.PP
The following character sets are currently supported:
.TP
.B ascii
7bit ASCII
.TP 16
.B utf8\fR = \fPunicode
Unicode UTF-8
.TP 7
.PD 0
.B iso1\fR = \fPisolatin1
ISO-8859-1 aka ISO Latin 1 (Western European)
.TP
.B iso2\fR = \fPisolatin2
ISO-8859-2 aka ISO Latin 2 (Central European)
.TP
.B iso3\fR = \fPisolatin3
ISO-8859-3 aka ISO Latin 3 (Esperanto)
.TP
.B iso4\fR = \fPisolatin4
ISO-8859-4 aka ISO Latin 4 (Baltic)
.TP
.B iso5\fR = \fPisolatincyr
ISO-8859-5 (Cyrillic)
.TP
.B iso6\fR = \fPisolatinarabic
ISO-8859-6 (Arabic)
.TP
.B iso7\fR = \fPisolatingreek
ISO-8859-7 (Greek)
.TP
.B iso8\fR = \fPisolatinhebrew
ISO-8859-8 (Hebrew)
.TP
.B iso9\fR = \fPisolatin5\fR = \fPisolatintur
ISO-8859-9 aka ISO Latin 5 (Turkish)
.TP
.B iso10\fR = \fPisolatin6\fR = \fPisolatinnordic
ISO-8859-10 aka ISO Latin 6 (Nordic)
.TP
.B iso12\fR = \fPisolatin7\fR = \fPisolatinceltic
ISO-8859-12 aka ISO Latin 6 (Celtic) - Draft
.TP
.B iso13\fR = \fPisolatin8\fR = \fPisolatinbaltic
ISO-8859-13 aka ISO Latin 6 (Baltic) - Draft
.TP
.B iso14\fR = \fPisolatin9\fR = \fPisolatinsami
ISO-8859-14 aka ISO Latin 6 (Sámi) - Draft
.TP
.B iso15
ISO-8859-15 - Draft
.PD
.TP 9
.PD 0
.B koi8r
KOI8-R (Russian)
.TP
.B koi8u
KOI8-U (Ukrainian, Byelorussian)
.TP
.B koi8uni
KOI8-Uni (Cyrillic)
.PD
.TP 30
.PD 0
.B cp1250\fR = \fPwince\fR = \fPwinlatin2
Windows CP-1250 aka Win Latin 2 (Central European)
.TP
.B cp1251\fR = \fPwincyr
Windows CP-1251 (Cyrillic)
.TP
.B cp1252\fR = \fPwinwest\fR = \fPwinlatin1
Windows CP-1252 aka Win Latin 1 (Western European)
.TP
.B cp1253\fR = \fPwingr
Windows CP-1253 (Greek)
.TP
.B cp1254\fR = \fPwintur
Windows CP-1254 (Turkish)
.TP
.B cp1255\fR = \fPwinhebrew
Windows CP-1255 (Hebrew)
.TP
.B cp1256\fR = \fPwinarabic
Windows CP-1256 (Arabic)
.TP
.B cp1257\fR = \fPwinbaltic
Windows CP-1257 (Baltic)
.TP
.B cp1258\fR = \fPwinviet
Windows CP-1258 (Vietnamese)
.PD
.TP 29
.PD 0
.B cp437\fR = \fPicmeng
DOS CP-437 (English)
.TP
.B cp737\fR = \fPdosgreek
DOS CP-737 (Greek)
.TP
.B cp775\fR = \fPdosbaltic
DOS CP-775 (Baltic)
.TP
.B cp850\fR = \fPdoswest\fR = \fPdoslatin1
DOS CP-850 aka DOS Latin 1 (Western European)
.TP
.B cp852\fR = \fPdosce\fR = \fPdoslatin2
DOS CP-852 aka DOS Latin 2 (Central European)
.TP
.B cp855\fR = \fPdoscyr
DOS CP-855 (Cyrillic)
.TP
.B cp857\fR = \fPdostur
DOS CP-857 (Turkish)
.TP
.B cp860\fR = \fPdosportugal
DOS CP-860 (Portugal)
.TP
.B cp861\fR = \fPdosiceland
DOS CP-861 (Icelandic)
.TP
.B cp862\fR = \fPdoshebrew
DOS CP-862 (Hebrew)
.TP
.B cp863\fR = \fPdoscanadfr
DOS CP-863 (Canadian French)
.TP
.B cp864\fR = \fPdosarabic
DOS CP-864 (Arabic)
.TP
.B cp865\fR = \fPdosnordic
DOS CP-865 (Nordic)
.TP
.B cp866\fR = \fPdosrussian
DOS CP-866 (Russian)
.TP
.B cp869\fR = \fPdosgreek2
DOS CP-869 (Greek2)
.TP
.B cp874\fR = \fPdosthai
DOS CP-874 (Thai)
.PD
.TP 12
.PD 0
.B mac
Macintosh Roman (Western European)
.TP
.B macce
Macintosh Central European
.TP
.B maccyr
Macintosh Cyrillic
.TP
.B macgreek
Macintosh Greek
.TP
.B maciceland
Macintosh Icelandic
.TP
.B mactur
Macintosh Turkish
.PD
.TP 13
.PD 0
.BR csk ,
.TP
.BR cyfromat ,
.TP
.BR dhn ,
.TP
.BR fidomazovia ,
.TP
.BR iea ,
.TP
.BR logic ,
.TP
.BR mazovia ,
.TP
.B microvex
DOS charsets for Polish
.PD
.TP
.PD 0
.BR amigapl ,
.TP
.BR fat ,
.TP 9
.B xjp
Amiga charsets for Polish
.PD
.TP 11
.B kamenicky
DOS charset for Czech and Slovak
.TP 10
.B wingreek
WinGreek (Windows font-based encoding for ancient Greek)
.TP 9
.PD 0
.B babelpl
TeX [polish]{babel}:
.I \&"a"c"e"l"n"o"s"z"r
.TP
.B ciachy
TeX \\prefixing:
.I /a/c/e/l/n/o/s/x/z
.PD
.TP 15
.PD 0
.B xmetodo
Esperanto:
.I cx gx hx jx sx ux
.RI ( vx\ w )
.TP
.B hmetodo
Esperanto:
.I ch gh hh jh sh u
.TP
.B antauxcxap
Esperanto:
.I ^c ^g ^h ^j ^s ^u
.RI ( ~u )
.TP
.B postcxap
Esperanto:
.I c^ g^ h^ j^ s^ u^
.RI ( u~ )
.TP
.B apostrofoj
Esperanto:
.I c' g' h' j' s' u'
.TP
.B malapostrofoj
Esperanto:
.I c` g` h` j` s` u`
.PD
.TP
.PD 0
.TP 8
.B viscii
VISCII (Vietnamese)
.TP
.B viqri
Vietnamese Quoted Readable Implicit
.PD
.TP 9
.PD 0
.B htmldec
SGML/HTML character references (decimal):
.I &#198; &#283; &#8594;
.TP
.B htmlhex
SGML/HTML character references (hexadecimal):
.I &#xC6; &#x11B; &#x2192;
.TP
.B htmlent
SGML/HTML character entities (names):
.I &AElig; &ecaron &rarr;
.TP
.B html
All three above (only as input format)
.PD
.TP 7
.B tex
TeX with some LaTeX or AMS-TeX extensions. There is no
distinction between normal and math mode - you will probably have to
insert some
.IR $ 's
manually.
.TP 11
.PD 0
.B mnemonic
RFC 1345 mnemonics preceded by
.I &
.TP
.B mnemonic1
RFC 1345 mnemonics preceded by
.I `
.PD
.TP 7
\fBany/\fILANGUAGE\fR (e.g. \fBany/pl-iso2\fP)
This special input format will detect the encoding automatically, basing
on the frequencies of characters found in text. Every language is
associated with a set of possible encodings used for it and average
frequencies of its letters (excluding ASCII letters). The best fitting
encoding is used for conversion. Currently supported languages are
.B cs
(Czech),
.B de
(German),
.B el
(Greek),
.B eo
(Esperanto),
.B es
(Spanish),
.B fr
(French),
.B he
(Hebrew),
.B it
(Italian),
.B pl
(Polish),
.B pt
(Portuguese),
.B ru
(Russian), and
.B sv
(Swedish).
.PD
.TP 7
.B varpl
Mixed Polish ISO-8859-2, CP-1250, and UTF-8. If you are reading Polish
newsgroups I suggest putting it as a filter in your newsreader (for
speed improvement it's better to call it directly, rather than through
konwert).
.TP
.B vareo
Mixed various Esperanto encodings.
.SH OPTIONS CONTROLLING THE ABOVE CONVERSIONS
.TP
\fB/1\fP (e.g. \fBkonwert iso2-ascii/1\fP)
Each unavailable character will be replaced only with a single
approximate char, not string. This is useful with the filterm program or
with preformatted text. This option is automatically turned on when a
filter is used as output for filterm.
.TP
.B /html
Text is assumed to be HTML. The characters
.I \&" & < >
resulting from other characters' approximations will be properly escaped
as
.I &quot; &amp; &lt;
.IR &gt; .
The
.I <META http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=.\|.\|.\|">
header will be fixed if present.
.TP
.B /htmldec
Convert META as above. Unavailable characters will be
encoded in &#Unicode;.
.TP
.B /htmlhex
Convert META as above. Unavailable characters will be
encoded in hexadecimal &#xUnicode;.
.TP
.B /tex
Unavailable characters will be described in TeX. Characters
.I # $ % & \\\\ ^ _ { | } ~
resulting from some characters' approximations will be
properly escaped into
.I \\\\# \\\\$ \\\\% \\\\& $\\\\backslash$ \\\\^{} \\\\_ \\\\{ $|$ \\\\}
.IR \\\\\\\\~{} .
.TP
.B /asciichar
Recognizes some ASCII representations of characters, e.g.\|
.I (c) .\|.\|.\| 1/2
.IR >= .
.TP
.B /rosyjski
Russian text will be replaced with its Polish phonetic transcription.
.PP
Some output filters can use the language information for choosing better
approximations of unavailable letters, for example
.B /de
(German):
.I \(:a
\(->
.I ae
instead of
.IR a .
.SH OTHER FILTERS
.TP
.B any/\fILANGUAGE\fP-test
Detects the encoding, but instead of text conversion only shows the
encoding's name. The additional option
.B /all
shows all possible encodings, sorted from better to worse ones.
.TP
.PD 0
.B cr
.TP
.B lf
.TP
.B crlf
.PD
Force specific end-of-line marker convention.
.B
cr
= Macintosh,
.B lf
= Unix and Amiga,
.B crlf
= Windows and DOS.
The input convention is detected automatically.
.TP
.B expand
Expands tabs into spaces (uses the textutils program expand).
.TP
.B unexpand
Compresses spaces into tabs (uses the textutils program unexpand).
.TP
.B rmspacesateol
Removes spaces and tabs at end of line.
.TP
.PD 0
.B qp-8bit
.TP
.B 8bit-qp
.PD
MIME Quoted Printable encoding:
.IR =A3=F3d=BC .
.TP
.PD 0
.B rtf-8bit
.TP
.B 8bit-rtf
.PD
Rich Text Format:
.IR \\\\\\\\'a3\\\\\\\\'f3d\\\\\\\\'9f .
.TP
.B txt-htmlchar
Escapes
.I \&" & < >
into SGML/HTML entities
.I &quot; &amp; &lt;
.IR &gt; .
Useful for including a text file inside HTML <PRE> </PRE> tags.
.TP
.B htmlchar-txt
Reverse.
.TP
.B rot13
Guvf vf n qrzbafgengvba bs ebg13.
.TP
.PD 0
.B toupper
.TP
.B tolower
.PD
Self-explanatory. Currently ASCII only.
.TP
.B prn7pl
Converts polish chars to control sequences for EPSON-compatible
printer. Using only 7-bit chars, backspacing printer's head and vertical
positioning chars ,.'` it creates pseudo-polish gryphs. You can specify
options:
.B /nlq
(default) which optimalizes output for better quality
printers and
.B /draft
- useful for ex. for 9-nails printer.
.SH FILES
.TP
.PD 0
.I /usr/share/konwert/filters/*
.TP
.I ~/.konwert/filters/*
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR trs (1),
.BR filterm (1)
.SH BUGS
APPLE character in mac* charsets, and CH and ch characters in koi8cs are
not preserved in conversion even when they are available. Also they
don't respect the /1 option. Reason: they are not in Unicode.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Konwert is a package for conversion between various character encodings.
.PP
Copyright (c) 1998 Marcin 'Qrczak' Kowalczyk
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.SH AUTHOR
.ft CW
.nf
 __("<   Marcin Kowalczyk * qrczak@knm.org.pl http://qrczak.home.ml.org/
 \\__/       GCS/M d- s+:-- a21 C+++>+++$ UL++>++++$ P+++ L++>++++$ E->++
  ^^                W++ N+++ o? K? w(---) O? M- V? PS-- PE++ Y? PGP->+ t
QRCZAK                  5? X- R tv-- b+>++ DI D- G+ e>++++ h! r--%>++ y-
.fi
.ft R
